= RubyFIT -- FIT for Ruby

This is RubyFIT, a Ruby port of the original Framework for Interactive
Testing written in Java by Ward Cunningham. See RubyFIT's home page at
http://fit.rubyforge.org for further information.

Author:: Giulio Piancastelli <giulio.piancastelli@gmail.com>
Requires:: Ruby 1.8 or later
License:: RubyFIT is Copyright 2004-2006 by Giulio Piancastelli.
          FIT is Copyright 2002 by Cunningham & Cunningham, Inc.
          Both FIT and RubyFIT are released under the terms of the GNU
          General Public License version 2 or later.

Document created on Saturday 11th December, 2004.
Last revised on Sunday 28th December, 2008.

== Quick Start

=== Unit tests and examples

If you want to be sure that at least something is working in the
framework, the first thing you could do is to run the unit tests that
accompany RubyFIT. You have the chance of running unit tests during
the installation of RubyFIT as a gem on your system. (See RubyGems at
http://rubygems.rubyforge.org and its documentation for details on how
to do it.) When RubyFIT is installed, you still can run unit tests just
by moving into its installation directory in the Ruby environment (e.g.
<tt>$RUBY_HOME/lib/ruby/gems/1.8/gems/fit-1.1/</tt>) and typing +rake+
at the Terminal or Command Prompt in that directory, which contains
RubyFIT's Rakefile. If you don't have Rake installed, you can still
manually run tests by executing the <tt>test/all_tests.rb</tt> script.

But the RubyFIT gem also comes with a series of examples directly taken
from the official FIT wiki (see http://fit.c2.com). HTML files
containing test data in tables are stored under the
<tt>doc/examples</tt> directory. If you want to run them to verify that
the framework passes them, just type <tt>rake fit</tt> at the Terminal
or Command Prompt in the directory containing RubyFIT's Rakefile.
Typing <tt>rake fit_report</tt> instead will also have the effect of
generating reports for those tests, so that you can see green, red,
yellow and gray cells with your own eyes.

The specification for FIT 1.1 compliant implementations is also
included, in the <tt>doc/spec</tt> directory. Running
<tt>rake fitspec</tt> or <tt>rake fitspec_report</tt> will have the
same effects described above in the context of RubyFIT's examples.

If you don't have Rake (see http://rake.rubyforge.org) installed, you
can still running FIT examples and specifications using the command
line tool provided with the RubyFIT distribution. See next section for
a brief explanation of its usage.

After having verified the capabilities of the framework, you would
like to start writing your own fixtures testing your applications.
Follow the online tutorials to understand how to plug into RubyFIT
and create fixtures and HTML tables with test data.

=== RubyFIT from the command line

A sample command-line script is included in the +bin+ subdirectory of
the RubyFIT gem to help you run tests in the most painless way. Being
RubyFIT a gem, the executable scripts to be used as commands from a
Terminal or Console prompt are made available at any file system
location.

You can invoke the +fit+ script passing two arguments: the first is the
HTML file containing tables to be tested, the second is the name of the
HTML file which will be created by RubyFIT and will contain the results
of the tests.

=== RubyFIT from a web server

A sample CGI script is included in the +bin+ subdirectory of the
RubyFIT gem, just to let you have a glance at how RubyFIT can be used
behind a web server. Put <tt>fit.cgi</tt> in the <tt>cgi-bin</tt>
directory under your web server tree (or in an equivalent appropriate
location), then change the shebang line to point to the location of the
Ruby interpreter on your machine. Finally, change the location to
RubyFIT pointing to the directory you have downloaded the code, and the
location to your fixtures to whatever directory you use to collect your
Ruby classes derived from Fit::Fixture.

You should now be able to use RubyFIT behind a web server. Write an
HTML page containing tables for one of your fixtures, and remember to
add a link to the <tt>fit.cgi</tt> script: serve it through the web
server you have installed <tt>fit.cgi</tt> within, then click on the
<tt>fit.cgi</tt> link to run the tests and get a result page in
response.

=== RubyFIT from Rake

RubyFIT tests can also be run from within the Rake build tool. See the
online RubyFIT documentation for a brief tutorial on how to use the
+FitTask+ task in your Rakefile. Visit http://rake.rubyforge.org for
further details about Rake.

=== RubyFIT in FitNesse

You can now run RubyFIT tests in FitNesse. (See http://fitnesse.org
for general information on FitNesse.) Define the command pattern like so:
"!define COMMAND_PATTERN {/path/to/ruby/ruby -I %p -I /path/to/RubyFIT/lib 
/path/to/RubyFIT/bin/FitServer.rb}" changing the paths as appropriate.

There is no need to use a separate RubyFIT package to use it from
within Fitnesse. After installing RubyFIT as a gem in your Ruby
environment, you can reference the <tt>FitServer.rb</tt> script in
Fitnesse from the location of the installed gem. For instance you can
set the latest parameter defining the command pattern to the string
<tt>/usr/lib/ruby/gems/1.8/gems/fit-1.1/bin/FitServer.rb</tt> for some
Linux flavors.

== RubyFIT Development Issues

Being Ruby a much more different language than Java, RubyFIT carries
some of those unique characteristics, sometimes bulding on them,
sometimes suffering from them. Here follows a uncomplete list of
issues in the development of RubyFIT, taken from the examples bundled
with the RubyFIT distribution.

==== Float Arithmetic

In <tt>arithmetic.html</tt> Ruby does math differently from Java. A
workaround is implemented in Fit::TypeAdapter#equals: if one of the
object is a Float and the other is a Numeric, equality is tested on a
1.0e-5 delta. Also, in <tt>CalculatorExample.html</tt> Ruby does Floats
with much more precision than Java, so that even a 1.0e-15 or -1.0e-17
difference is retained. A workaround in Fit::ScientificDouble has been
implemented, so that if the precision is exactly zero, the values of
two comparing objects must be equals in a 1.0e-5 delta.

Note than in <tt>AllCombinations.html</tt> Ruby does even
ScientificDouble with much more precision than the Java version. So,
another workaround in <tt>==</tt> and <tt><=></tt> had to be employed,
specifically to create another ScientificDouble to compare with and to
pick the precision of the less precise of the two to make the
comparison.

==== Reflection in Fit::Fixture

Being Ruby a dynamically typed programming language, it does not hold
static typing information about fields and values returned from
methods. The FIT framework instead uses those information to make
automatic comparisons between expected and actual results while running
tests using HTML tables as input data.

RubyFIT covers that mechanisms for basic types only. When a fixture
uses custom types instead, some additional static metadata must be
provided to let the framework know about types of fields and return
types of methods.

The online tutorials provide some examples on using metadata in
fixtures and related classes.

==== Class names from 'eg.AllFiles$Example' strings in Fit::Fixture

The syntax of fixtures class names into HTML tables is directly taken
from the Java world, where FIT was originally being developed. The
fully specified name of a class in Java is typically composed by a
series of words separated by dots: the last word is the name of the
class, while the other words identify the packages in which that class
is contained. RubyFIT translates those names into Ruby class names: the
name of the class remains unchanged, while package names (typically
written in lower case as per Java conventions) get capitalized; the
double colon is used instead of the dot as a separator between names.

A particular syntax is used in the Java world for inner classes, i.e.
classes defined inside other classes: in this case, a dollar sign is
used as a separator between the names of the parent and the child
classes. RubyFIT just translates the separator into a double colon,
leaving class names untouched.

==== Method names from HTML in Fit::TypeAdapter

RubyFIT uses Fitnesse-style graceful naming, modified to suit Ruby's
syntax and customs. For example, given any of these names in a row or
column fixture: <tt>some_method()</tt>, <tt>some method()</tt>,
<tt>some*method()</tt>, <tt>SomeMethod()</tt>, or
<tt>Some Method()</tt>, it will call the method +some_method+,
expecting it to be an output method (or getter), or the equivelent
accessor generated by +attr_reader+. Given any of the above names, with
the <tt>()</tt> replaced by <tt>?</tt>, such as <tt>some method?</tt>
it will match the same methods, but will prefer a method named
<tt>some_method?</tt>, if it exists. Any of the above names, with the
<tt>()</tt> removed (and no <tt>?</tt>) will be interpreted as an input
method (or setter) and will match <tt>some_method=(value)</tt>, as well
as mutators generated by +attr_writer+.

== Acknowledgements

=== Credits

The main developer and project maintainer is Giulio Piancastelli.

Other developers have contributed code to the project:
- Micah Martin
- Jim Hughes
- Brian Marick
- Bret Pettichord
- Jari Bakken

=== Special Thanks

Thanks to Ward Cunningham for creating FIT, and to Jim Shore for
coordinating the effort of porting FIT to platforms other than Java.
